Male Speaker: Ladies
and gentlemen, the
Vice President of the
United States.
(music playing)
Male Speaker: Ladies and
gentlemen, the President of
the United States.
(music playing)
Male Speaker: Ladies and
gentlemen, please be seated.
(music playing)
Male Speaker: The Troops
representing America's Armed
Forces and participating in
today's review from left to
right are the United States
Army Old Guard Fife and Drum
Corps, the United States
Army Band under the
direction of
Colonel Timothy J. Holton.
Elements of the Armed Forces
include the Presidential
Marching Platoon from the
Army's Third United States
Infantry Regiment the Old
Guard, the United States
Marine Honor Guard from
Marine Barracks 8th and I,
Washington, D.C. The colors
have always been one of the
most important elements
of a military unit.
At the center of our
formation is an Armed Forces
Color Guard bearing the
national colors and the
service flags of the Army,
Marine Corps, Navy, Air
Force, and Coast Guard.
The following is an element
from the United States Navy
Honor Guard from Navy Yard,
Washington, D.C. The next
element online is comprised
of members from the United
States Air Force Honor Guard
from Joint Base Anacostia Bolling.
Following is an element of
the United States Coast
Guard Honor Guard from Coast
Guard Station Alexandria,
and to the rear of the
formation are the 56 state
and territorial flags
of the United States.
(music playing)
(applause)
(inaudible dialogue)
(music playing)
Male Speaker: Sir, this
concludes the honors.
Male Speaker: Ladies and
gentlemen, please stand for
the advancing of the colors
and remain standing for the
United States
National Anthem.
(music playing)
Male Speaker: Ladies and
gentlemen, please be seated.
Male Speaker: Ceremonial.
(inaudible dialogue)
Male Speaker:
(inaudible dialogue).
Male Speaker: The Department
of Defense Medal for
Distinguished Public Service
is presented to
President Barack Obama.
President Barack Obama
distinguished himself as the
Commander-In-Chief of the
finest fighting force the
world has every known from
January 20, 2009 to
January 20, 2017.
President Obama kept our
nation safe, led a strategic
transition in our defense
strategy, strengthened our
alliances and pursued new
partnerships, and laid the
foundation for a force
of the future that will
continue to win
our nation's wars.
President Obama countered
decisively the immediate
threat to our national
security -- terrorism.
He directed the operation
to kill Osama Bin Laden,
decimated Al Qaeda's
terrorist network, put the
Islamic state of Iraq and
Levant on a path to a
lasting defeat, and
developed counterterrorism
platforms from South
Asia to North Africa.
He did so relentlessly,
effectively, with increased
transparency, and in strict
accordance with our values.
Simultaneously, President
Obama achieved verifiable
nuclear disarmament to
Iran, the gravest threat to
security in the Middle East.
And while countering
proliferation abroad, he
directed recapitalization
of our vitally important
nuclear deterrent
here at home.
As he successfully
neutralized immediate
threats to our security,
President Obama also
directed a transition
in our defense strategy.
He implemented a rigorous
intellectual policy and
legal framework to guide the
most solemn decision that a
commander-in-chief makes --
to deploy and employ our men
and women in uniform.
He supported strategic
investments to perpetuate
our military edge in the
air, at sea, with missile
defenses, and in space and
cyber domains including by
establishing the United
States Cyber Command.
In so doing, he led the
transformation of the United
States military from over a
decade of counterinsurgency
into a full spectrum
fighting force.
And critically, he directed
the United States rebalance
to the Asia-Pacific, the
most consequential region
for America's future.
President Obama also
recognized that security in
the world cannot be
America's
responsibility alone.
He strengthened our
alliances and pursued
new partnerships.
In Europe, he led the
adaptation of NATO to
continue its commitment to
a stable Afghanistan and to
actively counter threats to
Europe's east and south.
In particular, President
Obama directed the
bolstering of our Allied
Military Presence in Europe
and reestablishing of
deterrents against
Russian aggression.
In Asia, he modernized our
alliances with Japan and
Korea strengthening the
cornerstone of security in
East Asia, and deterring
threats from North Korea.
In the Middle East, he
strengthened Israel's
qualitative military
edge including with an
unprecedented package of
foreign military funding.
But in an ever-changing
world, President Obama
recognized that America's
relationships must also change.
He directed the advancement
of new strategic (inaudible)
including the unprecedented
deepening of the
strategically consequential
United States-India partnership.
In all of this, President
Obama recognized that the
source of America's greatest
strength, including its
military strength,
is its people.
To ensure that the United
States military stays the
best, he understood that we
must continue to attract,
recruit, retain, develop,
and transition the best
talent that our
nation has to offer.
His repealing of the Don't
Ask, Don't Tell Policy, and
the support for opening all
military occupations and
positions to women
will help ensure that.
He also championed advanced
research and an innovative
program to care for our
nation's wounded warriors
and their families and led
efforts to help veterans
make the transition
to civilian life.
These and many other
distinctive accomplishments
of President Obama reflect
great credit upon himself,
the Department of Defense,
and the United
States of America.
(applause)
Ladies and gentlemen, please
stand for the posting
of the colors.
Male Speaker: Post the
colors -- down, right, face.
(music playing)
Male Speaker: Ladies and
gentlemen, please be seated.
(inaudible dialogue)
Male Speaker: Ladies and
gentlemen, General Dunford.
General Dunford:
Mr. President, Vice
President Biden, Secretary
Carter, distinguished guests
-- thank you once again for
joining us as we pay tribute
to our Commander-In-Chief
and the Obama family.
Mr. President, I had the
distinct honor today of
representing your soldiers,
sailors, airmen, Marines,
and Coastguardsmen.
And as you know better than
most, those men and women
are busy,.
Thousands are deployed
across the globe.
They're meeting our alliance
commitments and deterring
potential adversaries.
They're taking the fight to
the Islamic State, Al Qaeda,
and other extremist
organizations.
They're maintaining freedom
of navigation and they're
defending us from threats
in space and cyber space.
Throughout your time in
office, we've often heard
you express your
appreciation for their
service and their sacrifice.
But this afternoon, Mr.
President, I want to
express our appreciation for
your leadership and honor
your service as our
Commander-In-Chief for the
past eight years.
Mr. President, we've been at
war throughout your tenure,
that's a period longer
than any other
American President.
And throughout those years,
you've always been there for us.
You were there in a
situation room where I
personally witnessed your
thoughtful and careful
deliberations when ordering
our young men and women in
harm's way.
You were there visiting
the force wherever it was
deployed, ensuring that
our men and women had the
guidance and support
necessary to get the job done.
You were there in the
holidays meeting with the
troops and calling them
around the world to simply
say thanks.
You were there when our
wounded warriors return home
to heal.
Your constant visits to
Walter Reed were without
fanfare of ceremony, but
always marked with heartfelt
words, hugs from moms, and
more often than not, a few
lunges and pushups alongside
those who were trying to
recover.
Finally, Mr. President, you
were there at Dover Air
Force Base to receive the
remains of the fallen and
you were there to visit
them at Arlington.
I could go on, but let me
share a few sentiments from
the men and women that you
have touched as a leader.
Lieutenant Colonel Will
Phillips sent this message.
"Mr. President and First Lady, thank you both for your
tireless dedication to our nation.
President Obama, you've set
an example for us all as a
statesman, a father,
and a husband."
Corporal David Dennis, who's
currently deployed to Iraq
told me how much he
appreciated your call on
Christmas Day to say thanks
for his sacrifice and service.
Sergeant Major Troxell and
I, by coincidence, met with
him a few hours after your
call and he was still pretty
pumped up after that call.
I was a bit disappointed
because after your phone
call that morning, a visit
from the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs and his senior
enlisted leader actually
didn't carry much weight.
(laughter)
Major Matt Lampart made the
following comment about your
hospital visit, "When I met
the President, I was just
regaining the
ability to walk.
I had some days that were
tough and some days of
doubt, but shaking hands
with President Obama and
having a conversation with
him was something that will
stick with me forever.
Given the responsibilities
that he shoulders, President
Obama's thoughtfulness and
common touch were
pretty inspiring."
Master Sergeant Keith Norris
described what your support
for educational benefits as
a senator and as a President
has meant to his family, "If
it wasn't for the Post-911
GI Bill, my wife and I could
not have afforded to send
our children to college.
My oldest son just graduated
and I'm excited that he's on
track to be commissioned in
the United States Air Force.
While I wish he was going
in the Army -- you may have
figured out that he's a
Master Sergeant in the Army
-- while I wish he was going
in the Army, I'm incredibly
proud that he'll be the
first military officer in my
family's history."
Chief Warrant Officer Nate
Powell commented on the
impact of your support to
military spouses, "Like most
public school teachers, my
wife doesn't earn all that
much, but she loves
being a teacher.
Because of the Military
Spouses Residency Relief Act
that President Obama signed
into law, my family saves
thousands of dollars a year
that we'd otherwise have to
pay just because she has
chosen to move with me
across state lines from duty
station to duty station."
And on the lighter side,
Captain Alex Lowe, who's an
Air Force Flight Surgeon is
also apparently a big fan.
He said, "I'm glad to have
started my service under
such a charismatic and cool
Commander-In-Chief who can
also play ball and
sing a mean Al Greene."
(laughter)
I can't witness
that, Mr. President.
I've not had the opportunity
to see that in the situation
room, but I'm going to take
Captain Lowe's -- Captain
Lowe's word for it.
Mr. President, on behalf of
Lieutenant Colonel Phillips,
Corporal Dennis, Major
Lampart, Master Sergeant
Norris, Chief Warrant
Officer Powell, Doc Lowe,
and all of our men and women
in uniform, we recognize and
appreciate your service,
your sacrifice, your
commitment to the force,
and your leadership.
Of course, just as military
families serve, so has the
Obama Family.
While unable to join us this
afternoon, Mrs. Obama and
Mrs. Biden's creation of
joining forces has made a
lasting impact.
In significantly expanded
veteran job placement and
educational opportunities.
The First Lady's legal
advice and tireless advocacy
has also benefitted military
working spouses making
careers more transportable
for spouses who move every
few years.
In fact, the entire
Obama family has served.
It'd be impossible to sum up
all their contributions
this afternoon.
So, in closing, I'll simply
say, Sasha and Malia, thank
you for sharing your mom and
dad with us and the nation.
Mrs. Obama, thank you for
improving the lives of our
families and veterans and
thanks for representing our
nation with such class.
And Mr. President,
thank you for being a
Commander-In-Chief that we
have been proud to follow.
On a personal note, sir,
thanks for your confidence
in me and in all of the
senior leaders who have had
the privilege to
serve on your watch.
And now, ladies and
gentlemen, it's my privilege
to introduce another
individual who has made a
lasting impact on our Joint
Force and someone we've been
proud to follow, our
Secretary of Defense, the
Honorable Ash Carter.
(applause)
Ash Carter: Thank you,
Chairman Dunford, for that
tribute to the President and
the First Lady's commitments
to our troops
and our families.
Mr. President, Mr. Vice
President, Department of
Defense leadership,
distinguished guests, ladies
and gentlemen -- welcome.
As the Department honors our
Commander-in-Chief of eight
critical years for
one final time.
This afternoon I'd like to
do so by speaking to those
aspects of his service and
commitment to our national
defense that have been so
striking and that will be
so memorable.
Each one, a constant
throughout his tenure as
our President.
His focused strategic
leadership, his steps to
strengthen our force both
in its people and in its
capabilities, and
his decision making.
Through it all, President
Obama has led our military
with an appreciation that
America's defense is so
vital that we, to whom it is
entrusted, must ensure its
continuity and excellence
across the years and across
the domains of
armed conflict.
Not just air, land, and sea,
but also space and cyber
space -- across parties,
across government agencies,
from strategic era to
strategic era, and from
Presidential administration
to Presidential administration.
And he's done so not only
for the last eight years,
but even today as we prepare
for new administration we're
following the President's
leadership and ensuring a
smooth and orderly
transition.
Our military is a global
force, one that President
Obama has steadfastly and
strategically led in every
region of the world to
ensure the men and women of
the strongest and most
principled fighting force in
history effectively defend
our country, deter our
adversaries, bolster our
alliances and partnerships,
and make a better
world for our children.
In the Asia Pacific,
President Obama has
sustained a comprehensive
rebalance of military power
to that region, the single
most consequential one for
America's future.
There, we're repositioning
60 percent of our naval
forces and overseas air
assets including some of our
most advanced systems, and
we're strengthening and
modernizing key alliances
and partnerships with Japan,
with South Korea, India,
Vietnam, Australia, many others.
In Europe, following
Russia's illegal annexation
of Crimea, and use of
hybrid warfare techniques,
President Obama has stood
strong with our NATO allies
and led a united response to
deter Russian aggression,
enhancing U.S. force presence and implementing a
new playbook so NATO can adapt against 21st Century threats.
In the Middle East,
President Obama secured an
accord that's verifiably
preventing Iran from
acquiring a nuclear weapon
removing a key source of
danger in the region.
But as we continue to
counter Iran's other
destabilizing activities,
he's also strengthened the
defense relationships
with all our key
regional partners.
For example, providing
our allies, Israel,
unprecedented security
assistance and advanced
capabilities across domains.
And around the world, in the
face of terrorist threats
from Al Qaeda to Al Shabbab
to ISIL, President Obama has
led the most robust and
sustained counterterrorism
fight in American history.
In the counter ISIL
campaign, the President
consistently supported the
development and acceleration
of the coalition military
campaign plan focused on
destroying the fact and the
idea of an Islamic state
based on this evil ideology
in Iraq and Syria,
countering the ISIL cancer's
metastases everywhere they
emerge, and most important
-- protecting our homeland
and our people.
In addition to countering
ISIL, he's taken action to
ensure Afghanistan does not
become a safe haven for
terrorist threat in America.
He's directed eight years of
unrelenting strikes on Al
Qaeda to devastate that
terrorist organization both
before and after bringing
Osama Bin Laden to justice.
He's built a
counterterrorism apparatus
that has thwarted countless
lots against our homeland.
And he did all of this --
all of it, consistent with
our values.
Because our President knows
as he's put it, "That we
lose ourselves when we
compromise the very ideals
we fight to defend."
At the same time, President
Obama made sure our military
stayed strong and grew
stronger in our people and
our capabilities to meet
those ambitious, but
necessary commitments.
Indeed, our President knows
very well that the single
factor above all others
that makes the U.S.
military the finest is its
people -- some represented
here today, far more
around the world.
President Obama has been
dedicated to improving the
quality of life of our force
making sure our service
members get what they need
not only when it comes to
training and equipment, but
also important benefits
critical to recruitment and
retention like maternity and
paternity leave.
He's helped keep sacred
the commitment to wounded
warriors, the families of
the fallen, to military
families, and to veterans.
He's made sure our people
are treated with the dignity
and honor befitting the
profession of arms from
supporting DOD's efforts
to rid our ranks of sexual
assault to improving our
suicide prevention efforts.
He's helped ensure the
long-term viability of what
is, after all, an
all-volunteer force
recruited in comparatively
small numbers from the
entire American population,
recognizing we have to
compete for top talent and
that to have the best, we
must select the best solely
on their qualifications to
meet our high standards --
not race, gender, identity,
or sexual orientation --
rather focusing only on
whether someone can
meet our standards.
And he's also supported
veterans on their transition
to whatever's next for them
in life whether it's earning
a degree, finding a job,
or starting a business.
I know how much that
matters, because I'm old
enough to remember a
shameful time when our
veterans were treated
very differently.
After our people, it's
America's capabilities that
make our military
edge second to none.
And President Obama has
sharpened that as well.
He always asks, "Are we
looking around the corner?"
To ensure we not only
anticipate the changing
nature of warfare and future
threats, but also stay ahead
of them and take full
advantage of new technology.
Under his leadership, DOD
began returning to full
spectrum capability in the
Army and Marine Corps after
many years of skillful, but
all absorbing focus on large
counterinsurgency
deployments.
We grew the size and the
lethality of our navy and
drove forward the
development and production
of new fighters, bombers,
and tankers for the Air Force.
We increased funding for
innovative technologies in
R&D, notably in critical
domains like space, cyber,
and electronic warfare.
All this, amidst persistent
budget turbulence
and uncertainty.
And even as President Obama
has worked towards a world
without nuclear weapons,
he's also ensured the United
States maintains a safe,
secure, and effective
nuclear deterrent for as
long as these weapons exist.
And finally -- finally, from
the vantage of someone who's
worked for 11 defense
secretaries over 35 years,
under both Democratic and
Republican presidents -- and
now being secretary myself,
I want to offer some
perspective on the nature
and the quality of President
Obama's leadership and
decision making as our
Commander-In-Chief.
Because it's often most
appreciated by those who've
had to sign deployment
orders, who've been to
Dover, to Bethesda, Walter
Reed -- who know that the
decisions he makes
have consequences.
Most Americans don't get
to see how President Obama
makes decisions about our
national security, so let me
give you a window to what
it's like when we meet in
the situation room
or the Oval Office.
To begin with, he's steady,
deliberate, rigorous, and
demanding of
himself and of us.
Always reflecting the
seriousness -- seriousness
with which he approaches the
grave responsibilities of
the Presidency.
He makes us think through
the consequences of our
proposed course of action as
thoroughly as that
can be foreseen.
And he always focuses first
and fixedly on our north
star -- America's
national interests.
I've been grateful that I've
always gotten a full hearing
for my views and
recommendations.
And in my observation,
Chairman Dunford always did
as well.
For President Obama valued
not only my strategic advice
and his other advisors, but
also candid, professional
military advice.
And he was always willing to
what we had to say, even if
I knew it wasn't something
he wanted to hear.
President Obama also knows
it's not only whether the
decisions made are good that
matters, but also whether
they're implemented
with excellence.
And that's a management
style that's actually rare
among policymakers
in Washington.
Whether it was accelerating
the counter-ISOL campaign,
stopping the spread of
Ebola, or rebalancing the
Asia Pacific, President
Obama's always insisted on
getting the job
done to the end.
He never hesitates to ask
hard questions, and keep
asking until
there's an answer.
That's not only because he
wanted his decision and met
our objectives achieved --
though both are important,
but because he was committed
to making sure that all our
soldiers, sailors, airmen,
marines, had what they
needed to do their job.
As you heard from Chairman
Dunford, that kind of
commitment means a
lot to our troops.
I've seen that
up close as well.
Many times, I visited
service members on bases
after the President has
stopped by, or wounded
warriors and their families
at military hospitals after
he's visited with them.
And no matter how much time
was passed, whether he
visited the week before, the
month before, or the year
before, they remember the
genuineness of
President Obama.
They can feel as only young
troops can -- the unending
concern he has for our men
and women in uniform and
their families, and the
boundless care with which he
makes decision that
put them in harm's way.
Over the course of eight
years, President Obama's
level of dedication
and mastery of his
responsibilities
has been remarkable.
It's difficult for anyone to
imagine the toll of never
being able to unplug from
their duties, and their
stakes for that long.
All the while, being a
gracious and inspiring
example, and all the while,
also helping to raise
two daughters.
It's impossible to imagine
a man caring more, although
possibly two sons.
Mr. President, for this and
more, I've been proud to
serve as your
Secretary of Defense.
And from me and the entire
Defense Department, thank
you, in full measure, for
your leadership, your
support, and your devotion
to our country and its defense.
May you begin to feel the
great weight shift from
your shoulders.
May you feel the warm wind
of the nation's gratitude at
your back.
May God bless you and your
family, and may God continue
to bless the United
States of America.
(applause)
Ladies and gentlemen,
President of the United
States, Barack Obama.
(applause)
The President:
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Please be seated.
Well, good afternoon.
Turns out, these are easier
when you're talking about
somebody else.
In moments like this, I
think of all the times that
I stood before our men
and women in uniform.
Commissioning our newest
officers, presiding over
promotions, presenting the
Commander in Chief's trophy
to the best football team in
the military -- I will let
you argue over that that;
I have never taken sides.
Secretary Carter, I could
not be more grateful for
your gracious words, but
more importantly, for your
outstanding leadership
across, as you noted, more
than three decades and
nearly all of my presidency.
You have always given me,
Ash, your strategic counsel.
You've made sure that we
were investing in innovation
for the long term, and a
strong force for the future.
As a physicist, Ash is also
one of the few people who
actually understands how our
dispense systems work, and I
know that our troops and
their families are immensely
grateful for the compassion
that you and Stephanie shown
them over the years.
So, to you and your family,
on behalf of all of us,
thank you for your
outstanding service.
(applause)
General Dunford, we relied
on you as commandant of the
Marine Corps, as our
commander in Afghanistan,
and now, as our nation's
highest ranking
military officer.
I thank you and General
Selva and the entire joined
chiefs for the unvarnished
military advice that you
always provided to you.
For your dedication.
For your professionalism.
For your integrity.
Because of you, because of
this team, our Armed Forces
are more integrated and
better prepared across
domains -- a
truly joint force.
Which is why, as a White Sox
fan, I can overlook the fact
that you love the Red Sox.
Moreover, on a personal
note, outside of your
professional qualities,
you are a good man.
And I am grateful to have
worked with you, and thank
Ellyn for allowing
you to do this.
(applause)
To members of Congress, Vice
President Biden, who, along
with Jill, has known the
love and the pride and the
sacrifice of a
military family.
To Deputy Secretary Work,
service secretaries,
distinguished guests,
dedicated civilians from
across the Defense
Department, my national
security team.
Most of all, our men
and women in uniform.
I thank you for this honor,
and for the warmth and
respect that you've
always shown me.
The support that you've
shown Michelle and our
daughters during these
past eight years.
And so, although I recognize
that the formalities require
me listening to praise
directed, in large part to
me, I want to
turn the tables.
I am still Commander in
Chief, and so I get to do
what I want to do, and
I want to thank you.
Of all the privileges of
this office -- and there are
many, I will miss
Air Force One.
I will miss Marine One.
(laughter)
But I can stand before you
today and say that there has
been no greater privilege
and no greater honor than
serving as the Commander
in Chief of the greatest
military in the
history of the world.
(applause)
When I took office, I noted
that presidents -- and those
of you in uniform, swear a
similar oath: to protect and
defense this country, and
the Constitution that
we cherish.
And by stepping forward and
volunteering, by raising
your right hand and taking
that oath, each of you made
a solemn pledge.
You committed yourself to
a life of service,
and of sacrifice.
And I, in turn, made a
promise to you, which, to
the best of my abilities, I
tried to uphold every single
day since -- that I would
only send you into harm's
way when it was absolutely
necessary with the strategy
and well-defined goals,
with the equipment and the
support that you needed
to get the job done.
Because that's what you
rightfully expect, and that
is what you
rightfully deserve.
I made that pledge at a time
when less than 1 percent of
Americans wear the uniform.
Fewer Americans know
someone who serves.
And as a result, a lot of
Americans don't see the
sacrifices you
make on our behalf.
But as Commander
in Chief, I do.
I've seen it, when I look in
the eyes of young cadets,
knowing that my decisions
could very well send them
into harm's way.
I've seen it when I visited
the field, in Bagram and
Baghdad, far from your
families, risking your lives
so that we can live ours
safely, and in freedom.
And so, you've inspired me,
and I've been humbled by
you consistently.
And I want every American
to know what I know.
Through year after year
after year of continuous
military operations, you
have earned your place among
the greatest generations.
The list of accomplishments
that Joe and Ash so
generously mentioned --
they're because of you.
It's what I tell my staff.
I'm the front man.
But you're the ones
doing the work.
Because of you, our
alliances are stronger --
from Europe to
the Asia Pacific.
Because of you, we surged
in Afghanistan -- trained
Afghan forces to defend
their country, while
bringing most of
our troops home.
Today, our forces serve
there on a more limited
mission because we
must never again allow
Afghanistan to be used for
a safe haven in attacks
against our nation.
It's because of you,
particularly our remarkable
Special Forces, that the
core Al-Qaeda leadership
that attacked us on
9/11 has been decimated.
Countless terrorist leaders,
including Osama bin Laden,
are gone.
From south Asia to Africa,
we have forged partnerships
to go after terrorists
that threaten us.
Because of you, we are
leading the global coalition
against ISIL.
These terrorists have
lost about half of
their territory.
They are losing
their leaders.
Towns and cities
are being liberated.
And I have no doubt this
barbaric terrorist group
will be destroyed
because of you.
You've shown that when it
comes to fighting terrorism,
we can be strong and we can
be smart -- not by letting
our forces get dragged into
sectarian conflicts and
civil wars, but with smart,
sustainable,
principle partnerships.
That's how we brought most
of our troops home -- from
nearly 180,000 troops in
Iraq and Afghanistan, down
to 15,000 today.
That's how, even as we've
suffered terrible attacks
here at home, from Boston
to Orlando, no foreign
terrorist organization has
successfully planned and
executed an attack on our
homeland these past eight years.
Because of you, the world is
seeing the awesome reach of
American Armed Forces.
In some of the first few
weeks of my job, when Somali
pirates took Captain
Phillips -- later on, when
they kidnapped Jessica
Buchanan, it was you that
went in, and you that risked
everything, and you that
brought these Americans
home to their families.
The world has seen your
compassion -- the help you
deliver in times of crisis,
from an earthquake in Haiti
to the tsunami in Japan.
Think of Ebola, and the
countless lives this Armed
Forces saved in West Africa.
It was you that set up the
architecture, and set the
example for the
world's response.
And one woman in West Africa
said, "We thanked God first,
and then we thanked America
second for caring about us."
That's the
difference you made.
You continue to make, in the
lives of people around
the world.
As you know, with service
comes great sacrifice.
And after 15 years of war,
our wounded warriors bear
the scars, both
seen and unseen.
In my visits to their
bedsides and rehab centers,
I have been in awe, watching
a wounded warrior grab his
walker and pull himself up,
and through excruciating
step, take a step,
and then another.
Or hearing troops describe
how they grappled with
post-traumatic stress, but
summon the strength to ask
for help.
As a military and as a
nation, we have to keep
supporting our resilient and
incredibly strong wounded
warriors as they learn to
run and walk and heal.
As they find new ways to
keep serving our nation,
they need to know that we
still need your
incredible talents.
You've given so much to
America, and I know you have
more to give.
And then, you have not seen
the depths of true love and
true patriotism until
you've been to Dover.
When our troops receive our
fallen heroes on their final
journey home.
Until you have grieved with
our gold star families,
who've given a piece of
their heart to their heart
to our nation.
A son or a daughter.
A father or a mother.
A husband or a wife.
A brother or a sister.
Every one, a patriot.
Every single one of these
American families deserves
the everlasting gratitude
and support of our
entire nation.
Today, after two major
ground wars, our Armed
Forces have drawn down, and
that is natural and
it is necessary.
And after reckless budget
cuts of sequester, we need
to keep improving the
readiness and the training
and modernizing our forces.
So, let me take this
opportunity, while I still
have it, to appeal to our
friends from Congress who
are here.
We cannot go back
to sequestration.
There's a responsibility
way forward, investing into
America's strengths, our
national security, and our
economic security, investing
in the reform and the
equipment and the support
that our troops need,
including the pay, and the
benefits, and the quality of
life, and the education, and
the jobs that our troops and
our veterans and all of
your families deserve.
But make no mistake.
Even with the challenges of
recent years -- and there
have been challenges, our
allies and adversaries
alike, understand America's
military remains, by far,
the most capable fighting
force on the face of the earth.
Our Army, tested by years of
combat, is the best trained
and best equipped planned
force on the planet.
Our Navy is the largest and
most lethal in the world, on
track to surpass 300 ships.
Our Air Force, with its
precision and reach,
is unmatched.
Our Marine Corps is
the world's only truly
expeditionary force.
Our Coast Guard is the
finest in the world.
And we're also the best
because this military has
come to welcome the talents
of more of our fellow Americans.
Service members can now
serve the country they love
without hiding who they
are, or who they love.
All combat positions in our
military are now open to women.
And Joe Biden and I know
that women are at least as
strong as men.
We're stronger for it.
It's one of the reasons that
our military stands apart as
the most respected
institution in our nation by
a mile.
The American people --
(applause)
The American people look up
to you and your devotion to
duty, and your integrity,
and your sense of honor, and
your commitment
to each other.
One of my proudest
achievements is that I have
been able to, I think,
communicate through the
constant partisan haze,
along with so many others,
how special this
institution is.
And the esteem in which our
military is held has held
steady and constant and high
throughout my presidency,
and I am very grateful for
that because you remind us
that we are united
as one team.
At times of division, you've
shown what it means to
pull together.
So, my days as your
Commander-in-Chief are
coming to an end, and as I
reflect on the challenges we
have faced together, and on
those to come, I believe
that one of the greatest
tasks before our Armed
Forces is to retain the high
confidence that the American
people rightly place in you.
It's a responsibility, not
simply for those of you in
uniform, but for
those who lead you.
It's the responsibility
of our entire nation.
And so, we are called to
remember core principles
that we must never hesitate
to act, when necessary, to
defend our nation, but we
must also never rush into
war because sending you into
harm's way should be a last,
and not first resort.
It should be compelled by
the needs of our security,
and not our politics.
We need to remember that
we must not give in to the
false illusion of
isolationism because in this
dangerous time, oceans alone
will not protect us, and the
world still seeks and needs
our leadership as the one
indispensable nation.
We have to remember that our
military has to be prepared
for the full spectrum of
threats, conventional and
unconventional -- from 20th
century style aggression to
21st century style
cyber threats.
And when we do go to war, we
have to hold ourselves to
high standards, and do
everything in our power to
prevent the loss of innocent
life because that's what we
stand for.
That's what we
should stand for.
We have to remember that as
we meet the threats of our
times, we cannot sacrifice
our values or our way of
life -- the rule of law and
openness and tolerance that
defines us as Americans.
That is our greatest
strength, and makes us a
beacon to the world.
We cannot sacrifice the very
freedoms that we're
fighting for.
And finally, in our
democracy, the continued
strength of our
all-volunteer force also
rests on something else.
A strong bond of respect
and trust between those in
uniform and the citizens
that you protect and defend.
At a time when too few
Americans truly understand
the realities or sacrifices
of military service.
At a time when many
political leaders have
not served.
If some in the military
begin to feel as though,
somehow, they are apart from
the largest society they
serve, those bonds can fray.
As every generation learns
anew, freedom is not free.
And so, while less than 1
percent of Americans may be
fighting our wars, 100
percent of Americans can do
their parts, at the very
least, to support you and
your families.
Everybody can do something.
Every business, every
profession, every school,
every community, every
state, to reach out and to
give back, and to let you
know that we care to help
make the lives of our troops
and your families just a
little bit easier.
Everybody can do something.
And that's why Michelle and
Joe Biden have mobilized
more Americans to honor
and support you and your
families through
joining forces.
And that's why, even after
we leave the White House,
Michelle and I intend to
keep on looking for ways to
help rally more of our
fellow citizens to be there
for you, just like you've
always been there for us.
So, we can't say it enough,
and we can't show it enough.
Thank you for
your patriotism.
Thank you for your
professionalism.
character, and representing
the very best of the
American spirit.
Our nation endures.
We live free under the red,
white, and blue because of
patriots like you.
It has been a privilege of a
lifetime to serve with you.
I have learned
much from you.
I am a better man
having worked with you.
I'm confident that the
United States and our Armed
Forces will remain the
greatest force for freedom
and security the
world has ever known.
God bless you and your
families, and God bless the
United States of America.
(applause)
(inaudible dialogue)
(music playing)
Male Speaker: Ladies and
gentlemen, the service songs
of the Armed Forces
of the United States.
(music playing)
Male Speaker: Ladies and
gentlemen, this concludes
today's farewell tribute in
honor of our Commander in
Chief, Barack Obama, the
44th President of the
United States.
Please remain at your seats,
and enjoy the United States
Army Band until the
departure of the official
party from Conmy Hall.